---
layout: post
title: What We Seek and What is Available
---

What do we seek from philosophy, spirituality, or the like? We might argue that it depends on the individual, but
one can make some generalizations about common goals. Most people seek out spirituality as an escape from the reality 
they encounter. Unfortunately, this can lead down a misguided path that, while it might offer closure, is intellectually,
philosophically, and psychologically unsatisfying. Observe a person's actions and you can easily see how the avoidance of 
suffering and pursuit of pleasure dictate much of their thoughts and consequently, their actions. Thus even a noble pursuit 
as that of knowledge, enlightenment, health can be pursues for the wrong reasons altogether. Sure, we might still be better
off at for having pursues the virtues at all, but we would be woefully unaware of the possibilities that remained, we will 
inevitable face division, fear, superficiallity in the very pursuit; thus causing what we sought to avoid in the first place.
So what exaclt is within our capacity as far as enlightenment, how close can one come to the ideal, the budha mind, or whatever
you're conception of that idea may be. It is clear that one can become enlightened over time, progressing so to speak throughout 
their journey. On the other hand, like many things in life, this is not a linear progression and is vastly different for every 
mind. What is available to just about every mind is the ability to cut the strings from the puppateering devices that control us.
This can be done through awareness, through meditation on one's mind, a familiarity with its tendencies. Is this a concious 
effort, wouldn't that be contradictory? Sort of; one's goal should not be to consciously, mechanically control thought, but rather
to observe it, to see it for what it really is. This observation in and of itself will lead to a deeper perception of your 
consciousness and in turn, without effort, lead to the rewiring of the brain. This observation, meditation automatically frees
us (at least momentarilty) from the puppet strings. When one becomes angry for example, and in that moment realizes and observes
this emotion for what it is, he does not have to say 'I am angry, I must be more patient, I must calm my mind'. He may do so if
he only has a superficial understanding of awareness, and this can be more useful than never observing at all and simply reacting 
and identifying with that emotion. However, once one has that deeper understanding and one observes anger, the feeling can 
immediately dissipate because we identify the emotion for what it is, and see it in its consequences in all its obsurdity. You
no longer have to take the time to talk yourself into a still mind, you simply observe and consequently ease into it upon 
meditation. This is what people mean when they speak of the less of ego. It is, and perhaps shall remain, unknowable whether 
an individual can through meditation or any other method achieve the total and permanent loss of ego. It is so deeply engrained,
universal, and on top of it we are conditioned societally in ideas that reinforce this feeling of the self. There is no way of 
knowing, but for our purposes that should not matter in the slightest. What is evident is that without meditation an individual
is lost and suffering, and with it he can achieve a greater sense of fulfillment, of truly living you could say. Additionally,
to pursue meditation with and endstate in mind is misguided; it is like exercising your body but a thousand times more variable.
In sport or any physical activity, you do not know what your capacity or capabilities are, your full potential. Instead one 
takes aim at a bullseye and practices their shot; over time progressing closer and closer towards the bullseye, and while he 
may never hit it, his accuracy increases and the target is more consistently hit. This is why philosophers, stoics in particular,
stress the urgency of one's spiritual path; you haven't got time to not live completely, to be caught up in the superficial.
In some sense I think they recognized that wisdom can come through continual practive and reflection, but that the instant one
delves into introspection (stoically speaking), the benefits are immediate and grow exponentially according to their dedication.

